# ElephantSimulation

## Simulating Elephant Populations to Determine Impact of Controlling Methods

### Introduction
In this project, we explored the concept of multidimensional lists and the usefulness of software engineering organizational principles when writing a program. Multi-dimensional lists are list objects that contain other lists as elements. In order to extract specific values from a multidimensional list, both the index position of the encompassing list and the smaller sublist need to be called and accounted for. In this project, we used multi-dimensional lists when creating a population of elephants. In order to give each elephant in the population specific attributes, the elephants were represented by lists containing gender, age, and pregnancy data. Each of the elephant lists were appended to a larger list that represented the population. Multidimensional lists allow programmers to store more data about each value in a list rather than using a single character. Using multidimensional lists in this project allowed the program to capture differences in each of the elephants and create a more comprehensive prediction model. Additionally, this program used software engineering organizational principles to make the code easier to comprehend and write. Rather than calling to certain elements in a list with a numerical index position, we can initialize index variables that hold the number for each index position in a list. The variable names should be indicative of what each value in the list represents. Instead of having to memorize the index position for certain values in the list, the programmer only has to call the index variable to extract the values that they need. This is very useful because it increases efficiency in programming and allows readers to comprehend the meaning of certain values in the code more easily. The purpose of this project is to model a population of elephants and determine how different methods of population control, specifically culling elephants or darting elephants with contraceptives, will change the overall population trajectory over time. The project results in a program that allows the user to control the probability of a female being darted with a contraceptive to determine changes in population growth or reduction.


### Structure:
This project used the concept of code-reuse to calculate the average number of calves (age  = 1), juveniles (age is greater than one and less than 12), adults (age is greater than 12 and less than 60), and seniors (age is greater than 60) in a population that was simulated over 200 years. In order to calculate the average number of elephants in each age group and factor in how the total population value was impacted by age, gender, pregnancy, and method of population control, we needed to create multiple methods. The newElephant() function created elephants with four different characteristics, which were chosen randomly, that defined their gender, age, months pregnant, and months left on contraceptive. The initPopulation() function added elephants to the population until the ecosystem had reached its carrying capacity. In order to account for age as a reason for why elephants may die, we created a calcSurvival function that used survival rates for different age groups to randomly choose whether an elephant would survive based on probability. The dartElephants() function, which represents darting female elephants with contraceptive, the cullElephants() function, which represents killing elephants, and the controlPopulation() function, which controls the form of population reduction that is used, were created in this program to help determine how different methods of elephant control would lead to different population outcomes. After creating functions to simulate a month and simulate a year for the elephant population, we created the calcResults() function that returned a list of the total number of elephants in each age group for a year. We were then able to run a simulation, which iterated over the calcResults() function for as many years as the simulation was specified to run and appended the return lists into a new result list. We used the result list and iterated over it to find the total number of elephants in each age group for all years of the simulation. By dividing these totals by the number of years that the simulation ran, we were able to calculate the average number of elephants in each age group for the total number of years that were simulated. In the command line terminal, we were able to dictate what the darting percentage of the population would be, which impacted the average values.


